HIP-980: Extend mirror node APIs with timestamp query (#980)
hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal: HIP/hip-980.md

## Rationale

Users may want to run historical transactions on a local mirror node instance using public state data. To make this possible, some of the existing REST APIs should be enhanced with a timestamp query parameter, so that historical public data can be fetched and used
for the simulations.

## User stories

- As a user of mirror node, I want to be able to query historical data for accounts, contracts, tokens, and transactions that were created at a specific timestamp.
- As a user of mirror node, I want to be able to run locally an `eth_call`, `eth_estimateGas` or `eth_debugTraceTransaction` call that fails on a production environment against the corresponding public state.
- As a developer of mirror node, I want to be able to test new feature locally against a real life data from a public environment, so that I have better understanding of the feature behavior.

## Specification

The proposed enhancement involves adding a query parameter `timestamp` to the existing routes:

> - `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/tokens` to return correct historical information about an account and their associated tokens for a specific timestamp

Reviewer: Would we need this for `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/nfts` as well to get the nft information?

Author: I think you're right, I will add this endpoint also to the HIP.

- `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/crypto` to return correct historical information about an account's crypto allowances for a specific timestamp
- `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/nfts` to return correct historical information about an account's NFT allowances for a specific timestamp
- `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/tokens` to return correct historical information about an account's token allowances for a specific timestamp
- `/api/v1/tokens/{tokenId}/nfts/{serialNumber}` to return correct historical information about an NFT for a specific timestamp

**Timestamp Query Parameter**

> A new `timestamp` query parameter will be added to search for different resources. This query parameter will represent a consensus timestamp in a Unix format in `seconds.nanoseconds` format and will have an optional comparison operator. That is, it will search for results that `equal`, `not equal`, are `greater` or `less` than the timestamp itself or its seconds component.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to support ne case? Semantics are always a bit strange with it.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to force bounded timestamp queries? (i.e. inidcate a note saying all unbounded timestamp queries will be automatically bounded to +- 30 days give < or >.

Reviewer 2: Nevermind these tables are not partitioned by date

Author: The reason to add the not equal semantics is to keep the same logic and behaviour as the existing timestamp filter for some of the other endpoints, e.g. `api/v1/network/fees`.

Reviewer 3: Please remove not equal. It's not performant as it can scan too many rows.

Author: Removed

---
hip: 980
title: Enhance mirror node rest APIs with timestamp query parameter
author: Ivan Kavaldzhiev <ivan.kavaldzhiev@limechain.tech>
working-group: Steven Sheehy <@steven-sheehy>, Nana Essilfie-Conduah <nana@swirldslabs.com>
type: Standards Track
category: Mirror
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: Accepted
created: 2024-06-03
requested-by: Solo Labs
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/981
updated: 2024-06-25
---

## Abstract

> This HIP enhances part of the mirror node REST APIs to support querying by timestamp. This will allow users to query for tokens, transactions, and accounts that were created at a specific timestamp.

Author: Fixed

## Motivation

> To enhance user experience and allow users or developers to query data from a specific point in time we will add a timestamp query parameter to some of the REST APIs, which are missing this support.

Author: Fixed

> To enhance user experience and allow users or developers to query data from a specific point in time we will add a timestamp query parameter to some of the REST APIs, which are missing this support.

Reviewer 3: Whoops, I didn't mean to suggest to remove `query`.

```
To enhance user experience and allow users or developers to query the state of an entity
```

This change will be especially valuable for building the foundation of the so-called shadow fork functionality, where a user or developer can use a local mirror node instance but run it against a production environment state.
Having this support, users or developers will have the ability to use public state data to simulate and troubleshoot existing issues or replay historical transactions using local mirror node instance against production state.

## Rationale

Users may want to run historical transactions on a local mirror node instance using public state data. To make this possible, some of the existing REST APIs should be enhanced with a timestamp query parameter, so that historical public data can be fetched and used
for the simulations.

## User stories

> - As a user of mirror node, I want to be able to query historical data for accounts, contracts, tokens, and transactions that were created at a specific timestamp.

Author: Fixed

- As a user of mirror node, I want to be able to run locally an `eth_call`, `eth_estimateGas` or `eth_debugTraceTransaction` call that fails on a production environment against the corresponding public state.

> - As a developer of mirror node, I want to be able to test new feature locally against a real life data from a public environment, so that I have better understanding of the feature behavior.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- As a mirror node developer, I want to be able to test new features locally against production state so that I have better understanding of the feature behavior.
```

Author: Fixed

## Specification

The proposed enhancement involves adding a query parameter `timestamp` to the existing routes:

- `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/tokens` to return correct historical information about an account and their associated fungible tokens for a specific timestamp
- `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/nfts` to return correct historical information about an account and their associated nfts for a specific timestamp
- `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/crypto` to return correct historical information about an account's crypto allowances for a specific timestamp
- `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/nfts` to return correct historical information about an account's NFT allowances for a specific timestamp
- `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/tokens` to return correct historical information about an account's token allowances for a specific timestamp
- `/api/v1/tokens/{tokenId}/nfts/{serialNumber}` to return correct historical information about an NFT for a specific timestamp

**Timestamp Query Parameter**

> A new `timestamp` query parameter will be added to search for different resources. This query parameter will represent a consensus timestamp in a Unix format in `seconds.nanoseconds` format and will have an optional comparison operator. That is, it will search for results that `equal`, `not equal`, are `greater` or `less` than the timestamp itself or its seconds component.

Reviewer 3: Though it spells out the operators, it doesn't actually list the operator names like `eq`, `lt`, etc. We should also add an example below with operators

Author: Fixed

`/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/tokens?timestamp={value}`
`/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/nfts?timestamp={value}`
`/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/crypto?timestamp={value}`
`/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/nfts?timestamp={value}`
`/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/tokens?timestamp={value}`
`/api/v1/tokens/{tokenId}/nfts/{serialNumber}?timestamp={value}`

**Request**
```
/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/tokens?timestamp={value}
```
**Example Request**

```

> GET api/v1/accounts/4408244/tokens?order=desc?timestamp=1705334449.803393003

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
GET api/v1/accounts/4408244/tokens?order=desc&timestamp=1705334449.803393003
```

Author: Fixed

```

> Note: if ```limit``` is not specified in the request, response will be limited to 25 by default

Reviewer 3: This information is not really relevant and should be omitted.

Author: Removed

**Response**

```json
{
  "tokens": [
    {
      "automatic_association": true,
      "balance": 1,

>       "created_timestamp": "1705334449.803393003",

Reviewer 3: This makes it seem like the user has to know the created_timestamp to pass via the timestamp parameter. We should note somewhere the behavior of the timestamp parameter and how it is linked to the implicit or explicit order. That is we return the state of that entity on or before the given timestamp. It doesn't have to be an exact timestamp match for when it was created or updated. So if order is ascending and `timestamp=X`, `timestamp=eq:X`, or `timestamp=lte:X` the behavior is the same. And vice versa.

Author: Added more explanation

      "decimals": 0,
      "token_id": "0.0.4328145",
      "freeze_status": "NOT_APPLICABLE",
      "kyc_status": "NOT_APPLICABLE"
    }
  ],
  "links": {
    "next": null
  }
}
```

## **Backwards Compatibility**

> The change is backwards compatible as it is simply adding а query parameter to an existing route. The data required to filter by timestamp is already stored in the mirror node.

Reviewer 3: Add that if the timestamp parameter is omitted it will revert to the previous behavior of querying for the latest state.

Author: Added

## Security Implications

Historical timestamp filtering can slow down some of the queries, especially if the timestamp is not indexed or the data set is very large.

## Rejected Ideas

None

## References

https://mainnet-public.mirrornode.hedera.com/api/v1/docs/#/accounts/idOrAliasOrEvmAddress/tokens
https://mainnet-public.mirrornode.hedera.com/api/v1/docs/#/accounts/idOrAliasOrEvmAddress/nfts
https://mainnet-public.mirrornode.hedera.com/api/v1/docs/#/accounts/idOrAliasOrEvmAddress/allowances/crypto
https://mainnet-public.mirrornode.hedera.com/api/v1/docs/#/accounts/idOrAliasOrEvmAddress/allowances/nfts
https://mainnet-public.mirrornode.hedera.com/api/v1/docs/#/accounts/idOrAliasOrEvmAddress/allowances/tokens

> https://mainnet-public.mirrornode.hedera.com/api/v1/docs/#/tokens/tokenId/nfts/serialNumber

Reviewer 3: `s/mainnet-public/mainnet/g`

Author: Fixed

---
hip: 980

> title: Enhance mirror node rest APIs with timestamp query parameter

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
title: Enhance mirror node entity rest APIs with timestamp query parameter
```

Author: Fixed

author: Ivan Kavaldzhiev <ivan.kavaldzhiev@limechain.tech>
working-group: Steven Sheehy <@steven-sheehy>, Nana Essilfie-Conduah <nana@swirldslabs.com>
type: Standards Track
category: Mirror
needs-council-approval: Yes
status: In review
created: 2024-06-03
requested-by: Solo Labs
discussions-to: https://github.com/hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal/discussions/981
updated: 2024-06-25
---

## Abstract

> This HIP enhances part of the mirror node REST APIs to support querying by timestamp. This will allow users to query for the historical state of an entity on the network.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This HIP enhances part of the mirror node REST APIs to support querying by timestamp. This will allow users to query for the historical state of any entity on the network.
```

Author: Fixed

## Motivation

> To enhance user experience and allow users or developers to query the state of an entity a specific point in time we will add a timestamp query parameter to all of the entity-based REST APIs that currently don't have one.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To enhance user experience and allow users or developers to query the state of an entity at a specific point in time we will add a timestamp query parameter to all of the entity-based REST APIs that currently don't have one.
Currently file, topic and schedule entities do not have this capability whiles account, contracts and tokens do.
```

Author: Fixed

This change will be especially valuable for building the foundation of the so-called shadow fork functionality, where a user or developer can use a local mirror node instance but run it against a production environment state.
Having this support, users or developers will have the ability to use public state data to simulate and troubleshoot existing issues or replay historical transactions using local mirror node instance against production state.

## Rationale

Users may want to run historical transactions on a local mirror node instance using public state data. To make this possible, some of the existing REST APIs should be enhanced with a timestamp query parameter, so that historical public data can be fetched and used
for the simulations.

## User stories

> - As a user of mirror node, I want to be able to query for the historical state of accounts, tokens, and other network entities.

Reviewer 4: Break this out into a user story per entity being enabled.
This will allow for easy mapping to E2E tests scenarios for other products and clearer understanding of capabilities developers can now utilize.

Author: Good idea, I broke the user stories in separate cases

> - As a user of mirror node, I want to be able to run locally an `eth_call`, `eth_estimateGas` or `eth_debugTraceTransaction` call that fails on a production environment against the corresponding public state.

Reviewer 4: Similar to above I would break this out into a user story per API noted

Author: Done

- `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/nfts` to return correct historical information about an account and their associated nfts for a specific timestamp
- `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/crypto` to return correct historical information about an account's crypto allowances for a specific timestamp
- `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/nfts` to return correct historical information about an account's NFT allowances for a specific timestamp
- `/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/tokens` to return correct historical information about an account's token allowances for a specific timestamp
- `/api/v1/tokens/{tokenId}/nfts/{serialNumber}` to return correct historical information about an NFT for a specific timestamp

**Timestamp Query Parameter**

A new `timestamp` query parameter will be added to search for different resources. This query parameter will represent a consensus timestamp in a Unix format in `seconds.nanoseconds` format and will have an optional comparison operator. That is, it will search for results that `equal`, `greater` or `less` than the timestamp itself or its seconds component.

> The exact names of the operators will be `eq`, `gt` and `lt`. The user shouldn't know the exact timestamp value of the time when an entity was created or updated, so that the parameter to work correctly. The API will return the results that match the timestamp or the closest one to it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The exact names of the operators will be `eq`, `gt`, `gte`, `lt`, and `lte`. The user doesn't need to know the exact timestamp at which an entity was created or updated for it to function. The API will return the results that match the timestamp or the closest one to it.
```

For example, if we have an `asc` ordering of the results, then `?timestamp=X`, `timestamp=eq:X`, or `timestamp=lte:X` will have the same behaviour and vice versa, where `X` is the desired timestamp.

```
/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/tokens?timestamp={value}
/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/nfts?timestamp={value}
/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/crypto?timestamp={value}
/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/nfts?timestamp={value}
/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/tokens?timestamp={value}

> /api/v1/tokens/{tokenId}/nfts/{serialNumber}?timestamp={value}

Reviewer 4: Missing contracts 
```suggestion
/api/v1/contracts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}?timestamp={value}
/api/v1/tokens/{tokenId}/nfts/{serialNumber}?timestamp={value}
```

Author: The contracts API already utilizes a timestamp filter.

Reviewer 4: Gotcha

/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/nfts?timestamp={value}
/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/crypto?timestamp={value}
/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/nfts?timestamp={value}
/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/allowances/tokens?timestamp={value}
/api/v1/tokens/{tokenId}/nfts/{serialNumber}?timestamp={value}
```

**Request**
```
/api/v1/accounts/{idOrAliasOrEvmAddress}/tokens?timestamp={value}
```
**Example Request**

```
GET api/v1/accounts/4408244/tokens?order=asc&timestamp=lte:1725334849.603493001
```
Note that the following two requests will return the same response as the query above:
```
GET api/v1/accounts/4408244/tokens?order=asc&timestamp=1705334449.803393003
GET api/v1/accounts/4408244/tokens?order=asc&timestamp=eq:1705334449.803393003
```

**Response**

```json
{
  "tokens": [
    {
      "automatic_association": true,
      "balance": 1,
      "created_timestamp": "1705334449.803393003",
      "decimals": 0,
      "token_id": "0.0.4328145",
      "freeze_status": "NOT_APPLICABLE",
      "kyc_status": "NOT_APPLICABLE"
    }
  ],
  "links": {
    "next": null
  }
}
```

## **Backwards Compatibility**

> The change is backwards compatible as it is simply adding а query parameter to an existing route. The data required to filter by timestamp is already stored in the mirror node.

Reviewer 5: The `а` in the phrase 

> ... simply adding а query parameter ...

is a Cyrillic and not a Latin `a`.

You can search the two _As_ above in this web page to verify it ;)

Author: Nice catch :)
